\input texinfo  @c -*- mode: texinfo; coding: utf-8 -*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename bookmark-x.info
@settitle Bookmark-X User Manual
@documentencoding UTF-8
@documentlanguage en
@c %**end of header

@copying
This manual documents Bookmark-X, a fork of Drew
Adams' Bookmark-X package, updated for GNU Emacs 30 and later.

Copyright @copyright{} 2000--2025 Drew Adams (original Bookmark-X code).
Manual text by the Bookmark-X contributors, derived in part from the
upstream commentary.

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU General Public License, Version 3 or any
later version published by the Free Software Foundation.
@end copying

@dircategory Emacs
@direntry
* Bookmark-X: (bookmark-x). Extended bookmarks for Emacs 30+.
@end direntry

@titlepage
@title Bookmark-X
@subtitle Extended bookmarks for GNU Emacs 30+
@author The Bookmark-X contributors
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top Bookmark-X

Bookmark-X is a fork of Drew Adams' Bookmark-X package, updated for GNU
Emacs 30 and later.  As the original Bookmark-X, Bookmark-X extends the
built-in functionality of @file{bookmark.el} with over 70 bookmark
types, tagging, a rich @file{*Bmkx List*} browse buffer, multiple
bookmark files, region bookmarks, persistent per-bookmark highlighting,
live preview, and more.

This manual is for users of GNU Emacs 30 or later.  It assumes you are
already familiar with the basics of GNU Emacs (buffers, files, keymaps,
the minibuffer).  @xref{Migration}, if you are coming from upstream
Bookmark-X and want a summary of what changed in this fork.

@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Preface::                     What this fork is.
* Introduction::                What Bookmark-X is and how it relates to @file{bookmark.el}.
* Tutorial::                    A guided first session.
* Concepts::                    The bookmark list, file, and display.
* Setting Bookmarks::           Commands that create bookmarks.
* Jumping::                     Visiting bookmarks.
* The Bmkx List Buffer::        @file{*Bmkx List*} mode.
* Bookmark Types::              The 70+ kinds of bookmark.
* Tags::                        Tagging and tag-based operations.
* Annotations::                 Free-text metadata.
* Multiple Bookmark Files::     Switching, copying, and merging.
* Highlighting::                Persistent per-bookmark highlights.
* Live Preview::                Previewing destinations before committing.
* Casual Integration::          The Transient menu UI.
* Cycling::                     The navigation list.
* Automatic Bookmarking::       Hook- and idle-driven bookmark creation.
* Autonamed Bookmarks::         Bookmarks whose names are generated.
* Temporary Bookmarks::         Session-only bookmarks.
* Bookmark Records::            What a bookmark looks like internally.
* Customization::               Options most users want to know.
* Migration::                   Coming from upstream Bookmark-X.
* GNU GPL::                     Distribution license.
* Key Index::
* Command Index::
* Variable Index::
* Concept Index::
@end menu


@node Preface
@chapter Preface
@cindex preface
@cindex Bookmark-X and to Bookmark-X
@cindex fork of Bookmark-X

@dfn{Bookmark-X} is a fork of Drew Adams' Bookmark-X package, modernized
for GNU Emacs 30 and later. 
Bookmark-X supports the entire span of GNU Emacs from
version 20 through 26 — a quarter-century of Emacs history.  To run
on each release the source carried many conditional execution paths, many fallback
implementations of functions that became built-in years later,
runtime probes for keymaps and faces that were not always present,
and duplicated @code{defcustom} forms with different @code{:type}
widgets for each Emacs generation.  This fork simplifies it. It requires GNU
Emacs 30 or later and uses many of the modern built-ins that replaced coded functionality in Bookmark-X.

Upstream Bookmark-X shipped with two notable third-party integrations
that no longer match how most users work in Emacs 30: a deep tie-in to
Drew Adams' Icicles completion framework, and an active integration with
@code{emacs-w3m} (a popular external web browser in the mid-2000s).
This fork drops both.  In place of Icicles, Bookmark-X uses plain
@code{completing-read} everywhere and assumes the user brings their own
modern completion stack on top --- @code{vertico} and @code{consult}
with @code{marginalia} and @code{orderless}, or @code{helm}, or
@code{ivy}, all work without any package-specific glue (and
@code{consult-bookmark} adds live preview for free; @pxref{Live
Preview}).  In place of @code{emacs-w3m}, Bookmark-X uses the built-in
@code{eww} browser: legacy W3M bookmarks saved by older sessions are
still recognised by @code{bmkx-w3m-jump}, but their handler routes them
through @code{bmkx-jump-eww} so they keep working, and no new W3M
bookmarks are created.  This fork also adds an optional Casual Transient
menu.  @xref{Migration}, for the complete change list.

The goal of this fork is to retain the original functionality of
Bookmark-X.  The only major exception is that it does not replace the
bookmark package by replacing its functionality. Instead, it provides
functions that are equivalent to it.  For example, @code{bmkx-list} and
@code{bmkx-jump} instead of redefining @code{bookmark-list} and
@code{bookmark-jump}. This way, both packages can coexist.  In fact, 
built-in Bookmark can read bookmark files created by Bookmark-X and vice-versa.


@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction
@cindex introduction
@cindex Bookmark-X versus @file{bookmark.el}

Bookmark-X is a substantial extension of GNU Emacs's built-in
@file{bookmark.el}.  It keeps every concept from built-in
bookmarks---named, persistent placeholders into files, buffers, Info
nodes, and so on---but makes bookmarks useful as persistent records,
not just saved positions.

Bookmark-X enlarges built-in bookmarks in three directions:

@enumerate
@item
@strong{Richer bookmarks.}  Bookmarks can carry tags, annotations,
region information, visit counts, last-access timestamps, and arbitrary
user data.  They can be highlighted in the buffer they point to, and
they remember where they were even when the file has been edited.

@item
@strong{More kinds of bookmarks.}  In addition to bookmarks that ``go''
to a location, Bookmark-X ships over 70 bookmark types: Dired buffers,
Info nodes, Gnus articles, EWW pages, @command{man} pages, image files,
URLs, desktops, keyboard macros, sets of variables, snippets of text,
sequences of other bookmarks, whole bookmark files, and more.

@item
@strong{More to do with bookmarks.}  The @file{*Bmkx List*} buffer is
significantly enhanced.  You can mark, sort, filter, omit, search,
query-replace, tag, retag, edit, clone, highlight, describe, and
copy/move bookmarks across multiple bookmark files.  You can save
bookmark-list views, define your own jump commands and sort orders, and
cycle through arbitrary sets of bookmarks (``the navigation list'').
@end enumerate

@cindex sibling design
@cindex relationship to @file{bookmark.el}
@strong{Bookmark-X is an additive sibling of the built-in
@file{bookmark.el}.}  Loading this package does @emph{not} redefine any
function from @file{bookmark.el}.  Every command in Bookmark-X lives
under the @code{bmkx-} prefix and is available from its own keymaps
(@kbd{C-x x}, @kbd{C-x j}, @kbd{C-x 4 j}).  The standard
@kbd{C-x r m}, @kbd{C-x r b} and @kbd{C-x r l} bindings still call the
built-in.  Both systems read and write the same on-disk bookmark file
format, so you can use either at any time.

If you would like the standard keys to invoke Bookmark-X instead, see
@ref{Standard Keys}.


@node Tutorial
@chapter Tutorial
@cindex tutorial
@cindex first session

This chapter walks through a typical first session.  Open a few files
you actually use, then follow along.

@section Creating Your First Bookmark
@cindex creating bookmarks, tutorial

Place point somewhere in a file you visit often---say, midway through
a long @file{README}.  Type:

@example
M-x bmkx-bookmark-set-confirm-overwrite RET
@end example

(The shorter key sequence is @kbd{C-x x m}.)  Emacs prompts for a
bookmark name; type @kbd{readme top RET}.  The bookmark is set at
point, and the bookmark file is updated on disk (if @code{bookmark-save-flag}
is @code{t}, which is the default).

@section Opening the Bookmark List
@cindex opening @file{*Bmkx List*}, tutorial

Type @kbd{C-x x e} (or @kbd{M-x bmkx-list}).  Buffer
@file{*Bmkx List*} appears.  You see one row per bookmark, in a marked,
sortable display.

Try the basics:

@table @kbd
@item n
Next line.
@item p
Previous line.
@item @key{RET}
Open the bookmark on the current line in the same window.
@item o
Open it in another window.
@item @key{TAB}
@itemx C-o
@emph{Preview} it in another window without leaving @file{*Bmkx List*}.
@item q
Quit.  The buffer is hidden; your bookmarks stay in memory.
@end table

@section Adding a Tag
@cindex tagging, tutorial

In @file{*Bmkx List*}, place point on the bookmark you just created.
Type @kbd{T +} (@code{bmkx-add-tags}).  At the @samp{Tag(s):} prompt
type @kbd{doc RET RET} (the empty entry ends the list).  A small
@samp{t} now appears on that bookmark's line, indicating it is tagged.

To list only tagged bookmarks: @kbd{T S}.  To show all again: @kbd{.}.

@section Jumping
@cindex jumping, tutorial

You can jump from anywhere in Emacs:

@example
C-x j j RET readme top RET
@end example

@code{bmkx-jump} prompts you with completion; type the bookmark name
or use your usual completion machinery to pick.  If the @code{consult}
package is loaded, you get live preview as you move through candidates.

To jump in the other window, use @kbd{C-x 4 j j}.  To jump only among
bookmarks of a specific type (Dired, Info, EWW, @dots{}), use
@kbd{C-x j :} and choose the type.

@section Filtering and Sorting
@cindex filtering, tutorial
@cindex sorting, tutorial

Open @file{*Bmkx List*} (@kbd{C-x x e}) and try:

@table @kbd
@item s s
Cycle through sort orders.  Repeat until something useful.
@item s n
Sort by bookmark name.
@item s d
Sort by last bookmark access (most recent first).
@item < @r{/} >
Show only unmarked / marked bookmarks.
@item P B
Incremental filter on bookmark name.  Type a regexp; press @key{RET} to
commit.
@item .
Show all bookmarks again.
@item M-t
Toggle the location column (file or buffer name).
@end table

@section Multiple Bookmarks at Once
@cindex marked bookmarks, tutorial

Mark several bookmarks with @kbd{m} (or @kbd{M-m} to mark all).  Then:

@table @kbd
@item T > +
Add tags to all marked bookmarks at once.
@item D
Delete all marked bookmarks (after confirmation).
@item M-d >
Open Dired on every local file among the marked bookmarks.
@item Y > +
Copy the marked bookmarks into another bookmark file.
@end table

@section Live Preview Mode
@cindex preview mode, tutorial

Type @kbd{M-p} in @file{*Bmkx List*}.  The mode-line lighter changes to
@samp{ Pv}.  Now moving point onto a row immediately opens that
bookmark's destination in another window---without selecting it.  Press
@kbd{M-p} again to turn the mode off; the window configuration is
restored to what it was when you entered the mode.

@section Saving and Switching Bookmark Files
@cindex bookmark files, tutorial

Your bookmarks live in @code{bookmark-default-file}
(@file{~/.emacs.d/bookmarks} by default), and are saved automatically.
To save explicitly: @kbd{S} in @file{*Bmkx List*}.  To switch to a
different bookmark file: @kbd{L} (@code{bmkx-switch-bookmark-file-create}).

That is the core workflow.  The rest of this manual reads as a
reference: each chapter covers one feature in detail.


@node Concepts
@chapter Concepts: list, file, display
@cindex concepts
@cindex bookmark list
@cindex bookmark file
@cindex bookmark-list display

Three different things are commonly confused.  Understanding them is
the single most important thing for using Bookmark-X effectively.

@table @asis
@item The bookmark list
The in-memory set of bookmarks.  It is the value of internal variable
@code{bookmark-alist}.  Adding, renaming, deleting, or jumping to a
bookmark updates this list.

@item The bookmark file
An on-disk persistent record of a set of bookmarks.  Its default
location is @code{bookmark-default-file}.  Multiple bookmark files may
exist; only one is @emph{current} at a time.

@item The bookmark-list display
Buffer @file{*Bmkx List*}.  It is a snapshot view of the bookmark list,
rendered with markings, sort order, filters, and so on.
@end table

These three can be out of sync.  The @emph{list} rules during an Emacs
session.  The @emph{file} rules across sessions (it is all that survives
when Emacs exits).  In the display,
@code{bmkx-bmenu-refresh-menu-list} (@kbd{g}) refreshes from the list;
with a prefix argument (@kbd{C-u g}) it reloads from the file.

@menu
* Prefix Keys::
* Standard Keys::
@end menu


@node Prefix Keys
@section Prefix Keys
@cindex prefix keys
@cindex keymaps

Bookmark-X allocates dedicated prefix keys for bookmarking, separate
from the shared @kbd{C-x r} register prefix.

@multitable @columnfractions .35 .15 .50
@headitem Keymap @tab Default key @tab Purpose
@item @code{bookmark-map}              @tab @kbd{C-x x}    @tab General bookmark commands.
@item @code{bmkx-set-map}              @tab @kbd{C-x x c}  @tab Create (set) new bookmarks.
@item @code{bmkx-tags-map}             @tab @kbd{C-x x t}  @tab Tag commands.
@item @code{bmkx-annotate-map}         @tab @kbd{C-x x a}  @tab Annotation commands.
@item @code{bmkx-jump-map}             @tab @kbd{C-x j}    @tab Jump (visit) bookmarks (same window).
@item @code{bmkx-jump-other-window-map} @tab @kbd{C-x 4 j} @tab Jump (other window).
@item built-in other-frame jump        @tab @kbd{C-x 5 j}  @tab Jump (other frame).
@end multitable

These prefixes are themselves customizable through three list-valued
options:

@vindex bmkx-bookmark-map-prefix-keys
@vindex bmkx-jump-map-prefix-keys
@vindex bmkx-jump-other-window-map-prefix-keys
@table @code
@item bmkx-bookmark-map-prefix-keys
Default @code{(list (kbd "C-x x"))}.
@item bmkx-jump-map-prefix-keys
Default @code{(list (kbd "C-x j"))}.
@item bmkx-jump-other-window-map-prefix-keys
Default @code{(list (kbd "C-x 4 j"))}.
@end table

Because they are lists, you can bind a keymap under several prefixes at
once.  The setter function rebinds the keys automatically when you
customize.


@node Standard Keys
@section Binding Bookmark-X to the Standard Keys
@cindex standard keys
@cindex @kbd{C-x r b}
@cindex @code{bookmark-jump} override

Loading Bookmark-X does not redefine any built-in command.  If you want
@kbd{C-x r m}, @kbd{C-x r b}, @kbd{C-x r l} to run the Bookmark-X
versions, add this to your init file:

@lisp
(define-key bookmark-map "m" #'bmkx-bookmark-set-confirm-overwrite)
(define-key bookmark-map "b" #'bmkx-jump)
(define-key bookmark-map "l" #'bmkx-list)
@end lisp

If you also want programmatic callers (@code{consult-bookmark},
@code{helm-bookmark}, Org-mode bookmark links, etc.) to pick up
Bookmark-X's enhancements when they invoke @code{bookmark-jump}, add:

@lisp
(advice-add 'bookmark-jump :override #'bmkx-jump)
@end lisp

No helper command is required.  These are plain Emacs primitives;
remove the lines (or call @code{advice-remove}) to reverse them.


@node Setting Bookmarks
@chapter Setting Bookmarks
@cindex setting bookmarks
@cindex creating bookmarks

@findex bmkx-bookmark-set-confirm-overwrite
@code{bmkx-bookmark-set-confirm-overwrite} (@kbd{C-x x m},
@kbd{C-x x c m}) is the enhanced replacement for @code{bookmark-set}:

@itemize
@item
Completion candidates default to bookmarks in the current buffer (or
all bookmarks if there are none), so you can easily update a nearby
bookmark.  A numeric prefix argument expands completion to all
bookmarks.
@item
Overwriting prompts for confirmation.
@item
Existing tags and annotations are preserved when you re-set a bookmark
(see @code{bmkx-properties-to-keep}).
@end itemize

@section Type-Specific Creation Commands
@cindex creation commands by type

The @code{bmkx-set-map} (default prefix @kbd{C-x x c}) groups commands
that create specific kinds of bookmark:

@multitable @columnfractions .42 .18 .40
@headitem Command @tab Key @tab Creates
@item @code{bmkx-bookmark-set-confirm-overwrite}  @tab @kbd{C-x x c m} @tab A normal bookmark at point.
@item @code{bmkx-autofile-set}                    @tab @kbd{C-x x c a} @tab An autofile bookmark for a file.
@item @code{bmkx-file-target-set}                 @tab @kbd{C-x x c f} @tab A file bookmark (file name at point).
@item @code{bmkx-url-target-set}                  @tab @kbd{C-x x c u} @tab A URL bookmark.
@item @code{bmkx-make-function-bookmark}          @tab @kbd{C-x x c F} @tab A function or last-kbd-macro bookmark.
@item @code{bmkx-set-desktop-bookmark}            @tab @kbd{C-x x c K} @tab A desktop bookmark.
@item @code{bmkx-set-sequence-bookmark}           @tab @kbd{C-x x c s} @tab A composite bookmark.
@item @code{bmkx-set-bookmark-file-bookmark}      @tab @kbd{C-x x c y} @tab A bookmark-file bookmark.
@item @code{bmkx-set-snippet-bookmark}            @tab @kbd{C-x x M-w} @tab A snippet bookmark from the region.
@item @code{bmkx-wrap-bookmark-with-last-kbd-macro} @tab @kbd{C-x x c C-k} @tab A sequence: a bookmark + the last kbd macro.
@item @code{bmkx-toggle-autonamed-bookmark-set/delete} @tab @kbd{C-x x c @key{RET}} @tab Set or delete the autonamed bookmark here.
@end multitable

@section Bookmarking Without Visiting
@cindex bookmarking without visiting

You can bookmark targets without first opening them:

@itemize
@item
@strong{A file or URL at point.}  @code{bmkx-file-target-set}
(@kbd{C-x x c f}) and @code{bmkx-url-target-set} (@kbd{C-x x c u}) read
a file or URL with the text at point as the default.
@item
@strong{Compilation, grep, occur hits.}  In @file{*compilation*},
@file{*grep*}, @file{*Occur*}, and @file{*Multi-Occur*} buffers,
@code{bmkx-compilation-target-set} or @code{bmkx-occur-target-set}
(@kbd{C-c C-b}) bookmarks the target of the hit at point.  The
@kbd{C-c C-M-b} variant bookmarks every hit;
@code{bmkx-occur-create-autonamed-bookmarks} (@kbd{C-c C-M-B} in Occur)
creates an autonamed bookmark per hit.
@item
@strong{Marked files in Dired} (requires @file{dired+.el}).
@code{diredp-do-bookmark} (@kbd{M-b}) bookmarks each marked file as an
autofile.
@end itemize


@node Jumping
@chapter Jumping to Bookmarks
@cindex jumping
@cindex visiting bookmarks

@findex bmkx-jump
@findex bmkx-jump-other-window
@code{bmkx-jump} (@kbd{C-x j j}) is the generic bookmark jump command;
completion offers every bookmark.  @code{bmkx-jump-other-window}
(@kbd{C-x 4 j j}) is its other-window twin.  Inside @file{*Bmkx List*},
@key{RET} or @kbd{f} calls @code{bmkx-list-this-window}, and @kbd{o}
calls @code{bmkx-list-other-window}.

@section Type-Specific Jump Commands
@cindex type-specific jump

Each bookmark type has its own jump command that offers only bookmarks
of that type as completion candidates.  They live on
@code{bmkx-jump-map} (default @kbd{C-x j}) and
@code{bmkx-jump-other-window-map} (default @kbd{C-x 4 j}).  A small
sampler:

@multitable @columnfractions .30 .28 .42
@headitem Type @tab Same-window @tab Other-window
@item File           @tab @kbd{C-x j f} @tab @kbd{C-x 4 j f}
@item Local file     @tab @kbd{C-x j l} @tab @kbd{C-x 4 j l}
@item Remote file    @tab @kbd{C-x j n} @tab @kbd{C-x 4 j n}
@item Autofile       @tab @kbd{C-x j a} @tab @kbd{C-x 4 j a}
@item Non-file       @tab @kbd{C-x j b} @tab @kbd{C-x 4 j b}
@item Dired          @tab @kbd{C-x j d} @tab @kbd{C-x 4 j d}
@item Info           @tab @kbd{C-x j i} @tab @kbd{C-x 4 j i}
@item @command{man}  @tab @kbd{C-x j m} @tab @kbd{C-x 4 j m}
@item EWW            @tab @kbd{C-x j e} @tab @kbd{C-x 4 j e}
@item Gnus           @tab @kbd{C-x j g} @tab @kbd{C-x 4 j g}
@item Image          @tab @kbd{C-x j M-i} @tab @kbd{C-x 4 j M-i}
@item Region         @tab @kbd{C-x j r} @tab @kbd{C-x 4 j r}
@item URL            @tab @kbd{C-x j u} @tab @kbd{C-x 4 j u}
@item Highlighted    @tab @kbd{C-x j h} @tab @kbd{C-x 4 j h}
@item Snippet        @tab @kbd{C-x j M-w} @tab @kbd{C-x 4 j M-w}
@end multitable

The generic ``any type'' command is @code{bmkx-jump-to-type}
(@kbd{C-x j :}).  It first asks for the type, then offers only
bookmarks of that type.  Useful when you do not want to remember the
type-specific keys.

@section @code{find-file}-Style Jumping
@cindex @code{find-file}-style jumping

@findex bmkx-find-file
@code{bmkx-find-file} (@kbd{C-x j C-f}) acts like @code{find-file}, but
obeys @code{bmkx-default-handlers-for-file-types}---so HTML files open
in @code{browse-url}, Word docs in @code{w32-browser}, and so on.  With
a prefix argument it also creates an autofile bookmark for the file.

There is a family of @code{bmkx-find-file-...-tags} commands (under
@kbd{C-x j t C-f ...}) that filter by tags while reading a file name
with @code{read-file-name}, so you can browse directories.

@section Mode-Specific @kbd{j}
@cindex mode-specific @kbd{j} bindings

Several modes bind @kbd{j} to the corresponding type-specific jump:

@multitable @columnfractions .35 .65
@headitem Mode @tab @kbd{j} jumps to a@dots{}
@item Info             @tab Info bookmark.
@item Gnus summary     @tab Gnus bookmark.
@item @command{man} / @command{woman} @tab @command{man}-page bookmark.
@item EWW              @tab EWW bookmark.
@item Buffer-menu      @tab Non-file bookmark.
@item Dired (@kbd{C-j}) @tab Dired bookmark whose directory is the current one.
@end multitable

@section Tag-Based Jumping
@cindex tag-based jumping

Tag-aware jump commands combine three ideas: which bookmark family
(file, autofile, this-dir-file, find-file), how many tags must match
(all = @kbd{*}, some = @kbd{+}), and whether matching is literal or
against a regexp (@kbd{%}).

@multitable @columnfractions .42 .22 .36
@headitem Command @tab Key @tab Meaning
@item @code{bmkx-all-tags-jump}             @tab @kbd{C-x j t *}     @tab With all given tags.
@item @code{bmkx-some-tags-jump}            @tab @kbd{C-x j t +}     @tab With at least one tag.
@item @code{bmkx-all-tags-regexp-jump}      @tab @kbd{C-x j t % *}   @tab Every tag matches a regexp.
@item @code{bmkx-some-tags-regexp-jump}     @tab @kbd{C-x j t % +}   @tab Some tag matches a regexp.
@item @code{bmkx-file-all-tags-jump}        @tab @kbd{C-x j t f *}   @tab File bookmark with all tags.
@item @code{bmkx-find-file-all-tags}        @tab @kbd{C-x j t C-f *} @tab @code{read-file-name} version.
@end multitable

Each command has an @code{-other-window} twin under
@kbd{C-x 4 j t ...}.


@node The Bmkx List Buffer
@chapter The @file{*Bmkx List*} Buffer
@cindex @file{*Bmkx List*}
@cindex bmkx-list-mode
@cindex bookmark browse buffer

Open it with @code{bmkx-list} (@kbd{C-x x e}).  This buffer is the
heart of the interactive workflow: filtering, marking, sorting,
tagging, highlighting, editing---everything happens here.

Major mode: @code{bmkx-list-mode}, derived from @code{special-mode}.

@section Header and Mark Columns
@cindex header line
@cindex marks
@cindex flags

The header shows the current bookmark file and a @dfn{title}
describing the current filter (e.g.@: @samp{File and Directory
Bookmarks} or @samp{All Bookmarks}).  The mode line shows counts:
marked (@kbd{>}), flagged for deletion (@kbd{D}), tagged (@kbd{t}),
temporary (@kbd{X}), annotated (@kbd{a}), modified-unsaved (@kbd{*}),
plus the sort order.  When a counter is split, @samp{N/M} means ``N up
to and including the current line, of M total.''

Per-line flags:

@multitable @columnfractions .15 .85
@headitem Mark @tab Meaning
@item @kbd{>}   @tab Marked.
@item @kbd{D}   @tab Flagged for deletion.
@item @kbd{a}   @tab Has an annotation.
@item @kbd{t}   @tab Has at least one tag.
@item @kbd{X}   @tab Temporary---will not be saved.
@item @kbd{*}   @tab Modified since the last save of the bookmark file.
@end multitable

@section Filename Display Style
@cindex filename style
@cindex shrinking paths
@cindex @code{bmkx-bmenu-filename-style}

Long file paths often get truncated at the right edge of the window,
hiding the basename---which is usually the most informative part of
the path.  The option @code{bmkx-bmenu-filename-style} controls how
the recorded path is reformatted before display.  It does not change
the bookmark data; only the on-screen rendering.

@multitable @columnfractions .18 .82
@headitem Value @tab Example
@item @code{full}       @tab @file{/Users/dmg/.emacs.d/modules/bookmark-x/bookmark-x-1.el}
@item @code{abbreviate} @tab @file{~/.emacs.d/modules/bookmark-x/bookmark-x-1.el}
@item @code{shrink}     @tab @file{~/.e/m/b/bookmark-x-1.el}
@item @code{basename}   @tab @file{bookmark-x-1.el}
@end multitable

The default is @code{abbreviate}.  The @code{shrink} style collapses
each parent directory to its first character (two characters when the
directory name starts with a dot, so @samp{.emacs.d} becomes
@samp{.e} and not just @samp{.}) and always preserves the basename
intact.

Only paths that look like absolute filenames are reformatted.  Buffer
names, @code{location} strings, and other non-path locations pass
through unchanged.

@table @kbd
@item M-F
@code{bmkx-bmenu-cycle-filename-style}---cycle the option through
@code{full} @result{} @code{abbreviate} @result{} @code{shrink}
@result{} @code{basename} and re-render the buffer in place.
@end table

You can also set the option directly with
@code{bmkx-bmenu-set-filename-style} (which prompts with completion),
or through the Customize interface.  The Casual menu (@pxref{Casual
Integration}) exposes the same cycle entry as @kbd{M-F}, with a label
that displays the current value.

@section Tags Column
@cindex tags column
@cindex @code{bmkx-bmenu-show-tags-flag}
@cindex @code{bmkx-bmenu-tags-column-width}
@cindex @code{bmkx-bmenu-name-column-width}

By default, the bookmark list shows a single @samp{t} flag for tagged
bookmarks but no indication of @emph{which} tags they have.  Enable
@code{bmkx-bmenu-show-tags-flag} to add a dedicated tags column
between the bookmark name and the file/location column.  The @samp{t}
flag is preserved.

@multitable @columnfractions .35 .65
@headitem Option @tab Effect
@item @code{bmkx-bmenu-show-tags-flag} @tab
Master switch.  When non-nil, the tags column is rendered.  Default
@code{t}.  Set to @code{nil} to restore the historical layout
(name column followed immediately by the file/location column).
@item @code{bmkx-bmenu-tags-column-width} @tab
Width of the tags column in characters.  Default @code{18}.  Joined
tag names exceeding this width are truncated with @samp{@dots{}}; if
shorter, padded with spaces.
@item @code{bmkx-bmenu-name-column-width} @tab
Maximum width of the bookmark-name column.  @code{nil} (default) uses
the longest current name.  An integer truncates longer names with
@samp{@dots{}}, useful for keeping layout stable when names vary in
length.
@end multitable

Tags are joined with a comma and no space, to maximise information
density.  A bookmark tagged @samp{alpha}, @samp{beta}, @samp{gamma}
in an 18-char column renders as @samp{alpha,beta,gamma  }; in a
12-char column it renders as @samp{alpha,beta,@dots{}}.

@table @kbd
@item M-T
@code{bmkx-bmenu-toggle-tags-column}---flip the master switch and
redisplay.  Reports the new state in the echo area.
@end table

To change widths interactively, use @code{bmkx-bmenu-set-tags-column-width}
and @code{bmkx-bmenu-set-name-column-width} (both prompt for an
integer; pass @code{0} to the name-width command for @samp{auto}).
The Casual menu's Tags submenu exposes the toggle and both width
commands.

When the tags column is on (or @code{bmkx-bmenu-name-column-width} is
set), @code{bookmark-bmenu-file-column} is automatically raised in the
buffer so file paths do not overlap the new columns.  Your custom
value, if larger, is preserved.

@section Primary Navigation
@cindex navigation in @file{*Bmkx List*}

@multitable @columnfractions .15 .40 .45
@headitem Key @tab Command @tab What it does
@item @kbd{n}                   @tab @code{next-line}                  @tab Next line.
@item @kbd{p}                   @tab @code{previous-line}              @tab Previous line.
@item @key{RET} @r{or} @kbd{f}  @tab @code{bmkx-list-this-window}      @tab Open in current window.
@item @kbd{o}                   @tab @code{bmkx-list-other-window}     @tab Open in other window.
@item @kbd{C-o} @r{or} @key{TAB} @tab @code{bmkx-list-switch-other-window} @tab Preview in other window; cursor stays here.
@item @kbd{1}                   @tab @code{bmkx-list-1-window}         @tab Display in only one window.
@item @kbd{2}                   @tab @code{bmkx-list-2-window}         @tab Display in two windows.
@item @kbd{g}                   @tab @code{bmkx-bmenu-refresh-menu-list} @tab Refresh (with @kbd{C-u}: reload from file).
@item @kbd{q}                   @tab @code{bmkx-bmenu-quit}            @tab Quit.
@end multitable

@section Marking and Flagging
@cindex marking bookmarks
@cindex flagging for deletion

The marking scheme follows Dired conventions:

@multitable @columnfractions .15 .40 .45
@headitem Key @tab Command @tab What it does
@item @kbd{m}     @tab @code{bmkx-list-mark}           @tab Mark this bookmark with @kbd{>}.
@item @kbd{u}     @tab @code{bmkx-list-unmark}         @tab Unmark this bookmark.
@item @kbd{M-m}   @tab @code{bmkx-bmenu-mark-all}      @tab Mark all bookmarks.
@item @kbd{U}     @tab @code{bmkx-bmenu-unmark-all}    @tab Unmark all (or only @kbd{>}, or only @kbd{D}).
@item @kbd{M-@key{DEL}} @tab @code{bmkx-bmenu-unmark-all} @tab Same as @kbd{U}.
@item @kbd{t}     @tab @code{bmkx-bmenu-toggle-marks}  @tab Swap marked / unmarked.
@item @kbd{% m}   @tab @code{bmkx-bmenu-regexp-mark}   @tab Mark by regexp.
@item @kbd{d} @r{or} @kbd{k} @tab @code{bmkx-bmenu-flag-for-deletion} @tab Flag for deletion (@kbd{D}).
@item @kbd{C-d}   @tab @code{bmkx-bmenu-flag-for-deletion-backwards} @tab Flag and move up.
@item @kbd{x}     @tab @code{bmkx-list-execute-deletions} @tab Delete all bookmarks flagged @kbd{D}.
@item @kbd{D}     @tab @code{bmkx-bmenu-delete-marked}    @tab Delete all bookmarks marked @kbd{>} (with confirmation).
@end multitable

@cindex @kbd{x} versus @kbd{D}
The pair @kbd{d}/@kbd{x} flags then executes; @kbd{D} deletes the
@kbd{>}-marked bookmarks in one step (after confirmation).

@section Filtering and Showing
@cindex filtering

@table @kbd
@item .
Show all bookmarks (clear any filter).
@item >
Toggle ``show only marked.''
@item <
Toggle ``show only unmarked.''
@item M-t
Toggle the file/buffer location column.
@end table

@subsection Filter by Type
@cindex filter by type

Keys ending in @kbd{S} show only bookmarks of one type; the matching
@kbd{M} keys mark them instead.  Examples:

@example
F S    file/dir bookmarks       A S    autofile bookmarks
B S    non-file bookmarks       Y S    bookmark-file bookmarks
R S    region bookmarks         Z S    bookmark-list bookmarks
I S    Info bookmarks           K S    desktop bookmarks
G S    Gnus bookmarks           V S    variable-list bookmarks
M S    @command{man}-page bookmarks  N S    non-invokable bookmarks
W E S  EWW bookmarks            w S    snippet bookmarks
X S    temporary bookmarks      O S    orphaned local-file bookmarks
# S    autonamed bookmarks      M-d M-s  Dired bookmarks
T S    tagged bookmarks         T U    untagged bookmarks
H S    highlighted bookmarks    - S    omitted bookmarks
@end example

@subsection Incremental Pattern Matching
@cindex incremental filtering

Type @kbd{P PREFIX REGEXP} and the display narrows as you type.  Press
a non-self-inserting key (e.g.@: @key{RET}) to commit.

@table @kbd
@item P B
Filter by bookmark name.
@item P F
Filter by file name.
@item P A
Filter by annotation.
@item P T
Filter by tag.
@end table

@section Omitting (vs. Filtering)
@cindex omitting

Omitting is a stronger form of hiding: omitted bookmarks are hidden
from every view except the dedicated omit view.

@table @kbd
@item - >
@code{bmkx-bmenu-omit/unomit-marked}---move marked to/from the omit list.
@item - S
@code{bmkx-bmenu-show-only-omitted-bookmarks}.
@item - U
@code{bmkx-unomit-all}---can also be invoked outside @file{*Bmkx List*}.
@end table

@section Sorting
@cindex sorting

Repeat @kbd{s s} (@code{bmkx-bmenu-change-sort-order-repeat}) to cycle
through every available sort order.  Or pick one directly:

@multitable @columnfractions .42 .15 .43
@headitem Command @tab Key @tab Sort by
@item @code{bmkx-bmenu-sort-by-bookmark-name}     @tab @kbd{s n}   @tab Bookmark name.
@item @code{bmkx-bmenu-sort-by-last-bookmark-access} @tab @kbd{s d} @tab Last bookmark access.
@item @code{bmkx-bmenu-sort-by-last-buffer-or-file-access} @tab @kbd{s b} @tab Last buffer/file access.
@item @code{bmkx-bmenu-sort-by-bookmark-type}     @tab @kbd{s k}   @tab Bookmark type (kind).
@item @code{bmkx-bmenu-sort-by-file-name}         @tab @kbd{s f n} @tab File name.
@item @code{bmkx-bmenu-sort-by-creation-time}     @tab @kbd{s 0}   @tab Creation time.
@item @code{bmkx-bmenu-sort-annotated-before-unannotated} @tab @kbd{s a} @tab Annotated first.
@item @code{bmkx-bmenu-sort-flagged-before-unflagged} @tab @kbd{s D} @tab Flagged @kbd{D} first.
@item @code{bmkx-bmenu-sort-marked-before-unmarked} @tab @kbd{s >} @tab Marked @kbd{>} first.
@item @code{bmkx-reverse-sort-order}              @tab @kbd{s r}   @tab Reverse direction.
@end multitable

Sorting is governed by option @code{bmkx-sort-comparer}; the built-in
@code{bookmark-sort-flag} is ignored.

@section Editing
@cindex editing bookmarks

@multitable @columnfractions .42 .15 .43
@headitem Command @tab Key @tab Edits
@item @code{bmkx-bmenu-edit-bookmark-name-and-location} @tab @kbd{r} @tab Name and target file (minibuffer).
@item @code{bmkx-bmenu-edit-bookmark-record}      @tab @kbd{e}   @tab Full record (Lisp sexp).
@item @code{bmkx-bmenu-edit-marked}               @tab @kbd{E}   @tab Records of all marked.
@item @code{bmkx-bmenu-clone-bookmark}            @tab @kbd{M-n} @tab Duplicate; default name ends in @samp{<2>}.
@item @code{bmkx-bmenu-edit-tags}                 @tab @kbd{T e} @tab This bookmark's tags.
@end multitable

@section Acting on Marked Bookmarks
@cindex acting on marked bookmarks

@itemize
@item @code{bmkx-bmenu-delete-marked} (@kbd{D}) deletes them.
@item @code{bmkx-bmenu-dired-marked} (@kbd{M-d >}) opens Dired on the
local files among them.
@item @code{bmkx-bmenu-query-replace-marked-bookmarks-regexp} (@kbd{M-q})
query-replaces across their targets, in the current sort order.
@item @code{bmkx-bmenu-search-marked-bookmarks-regexp} (@kbd{M-s a M-s})
regexp-searches across their targets.
@item Isearch commands (@kbd{M-s a C-s} / @kbd{M-s a M-C-s}) search
marked targets incrementally.
@item Tag commands (@kbd{T > +/-}) add or remove tags on the marked
bookmarks.
@item @code{bmkx-bmenu-list-tags-of-marked} (@kbd{T > l}) lists the
union of tags of marked bookmarks.
@item @code{bmkx-bmenu-edit-annotations-for-marked} (@kbd{a >}) edits
annotations of marked bookmarks.
@item @code{bmkx-bmenu-toggle-marked-temporary/savable} (@kbd{M-X})
toggles temporary / savable on marked bookmarks.
@item Bookmark-file commands (@kbd{Y > +/-/0}) copy, move, or create a
new bookmark file from marked bookmarks (@pxref{Multiple Bookmark Files}).
@end itemize

@section Describe / Inspect
@cindex describing bookmarks

@multitable @columnfractions .42 .22 .36
@headitem Command @tab Key @tab Shows
@item @code{bmkx-bmenu-mode-status-help}        @tab @kbd{?}, @kbd{C-h m} @tab Help, status, current file, legend.
@item @code{bmkx-bmenu-describe-this-bookmark}  @tab @kbd{C-h @key{RET}} @tab Detailed description.
@item with @kbd{C-u}                            @tab @kbd{C-u C-h @key{RET}} @tab Internal Lisp form.
@item @code{bmkx-bmenu-describe-marked}         @tab @kbd{C-h >} @tab Descriptions of all marked.
@item @code{bmkx-bmenu-describe-this+move-down} @tab @kbd{C-@key{down}} @tab Move + describe.
@item @code{bmkx-bmenu-describe-this+move-up}   @tab @kbd{C-@key{up}} @tab Same, going up.
@end multitable

@section Defining Commands From the View
@cindex defining commands from view

@table @kbd
@item C-c C-c
@code{bmkx-bmenu-define-command}---define a command that restores the
current display state (sort/filter/etc.).
@item C-c C-S-c
@code{bmkx-bmenu-define-full-snapshot-command}---restores the full
bookmark list including marks.  Larger but complete.
@item C-c C-j
@code{bmkx-bmenu-define-jump-marked-command}---a type-specific jump
command whose candidates are the marked bookmarks.
@end table

Defined commands are appended to @code{bmkx-bmenu-commands-file},
which is loaded automatically on first opening @file{*Bmkx List*}.

@section Preview Mode
@cindex preview mode, in @file{*Bmkx List*}

@kbd{M-p} (@code{bmkx-list-preview-mode}) toggles live preview of the
bookmark on point.  @xref{Live Preview}, for details.

@section Casual Menu
@cindex Casual menu, in @file{*Bmkx List*}

@kbd{c} (@code{casual-bmkx-tmenu}) opens a Transient-based menu UI if
the @code{casual-lib} package is installed.  @xref{Casual Integration}.

@section Controlling Where the List Opens
@cindex window placement, of @file{*Bmkx List*}
@cindex @code{display-buffer-alist}, for @file{*Bmkx List*}

When called interactively, @code{bmkx-list} hands the buffer to
@code{pop-to-buffer-same-window}: by default the list replaces the
buffer in the currently-selected window.  No frames or windows are
created, deleted, or resized -- Emacs's normal display rules apply.

To override the default placement, add an entry for the buffer name
@file{*Bmkx List*} to @code{display-buffer-alist}; that variable
takes precedence over the package's default.  A few useful recipes:

@example
;; Always in the current window (this is the default; included for
;; completeness):
(add-to-list 'display-buffer-alist
             '("\\*Bmkx List\\*" (display-buffer-same-window)))

;; Dedicated side window on the right, 60 columns wide:
(add-to-list 'display-buffer-alist
             '("\\*Bmkx List\\*"
               (display-buffer-in-side-window)
               (side . right) (window-width . 60)))

;; A dedicated frame named "Bookmarks":
(add-to-list 'display-buffer-alist
             '("\\*Bmkx List\\*"
               (display-buffer-pop-up-frame)
               (pop-up-frame-parameters
                (name . "Bookmarks") (width . 100) (height . 40))))

;; Re-use whichever window most recently showed the list, otherwise
;; pop a new window below the current one:
(add-to-list 'display-buffer-alist
             '("\\*Bmkx List\\*"
               (display-buffer-reuse-window display-buffer-below-selected)))
@end example

The same recipes apply to the @file{*Bmkx Preview*} buffer used by
live preview mode (@pxref{Live Preview}).


@node Bookmark Types
@chapter Bookmark Types
@cindex bookmark types
@cindex types of bookmark

A bookmark @dfn{type} is really just a @dfn{handler}: a function that
``jumps to'' (acts on) the bookmark.  Bookmark-X ships handlers for
around 70 of them.

Run @kbd{M-x bmkx-types-alist} to list every type registered in your
session.  @code{bmkx-jump-to-type} (@kbd{C-x j :}) lets you pick a type
interactively.  Predicates of the form @code{bmkx-TYPE-bookmark-p}
recognize each type.

@section Location / File Bookmarks

@itemize
@item @strong{File / local file / remote file.}  Jumping visits the file.
@item @strong{Directory.}  Like a file bookmark, but the destination is
a directory.
@item @strong{Non-file (buffer).}  Like a file bookmark for a buffer
that is not visiting a file.
@item @strong{Region.}  A bookmark with @code{front-context-string},
@code{rear-context-string}, plus an @code{end-position} property.
Jumping activates the region (controlled by @code{bmkx-use-region}).
@code{bmkx-region-jump-narrow-indirect-other-window} (@kbd{C-x 4 j R})
narrows the region into a cloned indirect buffer.
@end itemize

@section Autofile Bookmarks
@cindex autofile

An @dfn{autofile} is a bookmark whose name is the non-directory part of
its file name.  @code{bmkx-autofile-set} (@kbd{C-x x c a}) creates one.
Combined with tags this gives you a filesystem-wide metadata layer.
Related options: @code{bmkx-autofile-filecache} (advise
@code{file-cache-add-file} to also create autofiles),
@code{bmkx-autofile-access-invokes-bookmark-flag} (make @code{find-file}
also ``visit'' the autofile, updating its visit count).

@section Dired and Dired-Tree Bookmarks
@cindex Dired bookmarks

A Dired bookmark records:

@itemize
@item the Dired directory,
@item the @command{ls} switches,
@item which files are marked,
@item which subdirectories are inserted,
@item which subdirectories are hidden.
@end itemize

Jumping reproduces the Dired buffer with the same markings, inserted
subdirs, and hidden subdirs.  A @dfn{Dired-tree bookmark} is a sequence
bookmark whose components are Dired bookmarks for a directory and its
descendants.  @code{diredp-do-bookmark-dirs-recursive} (from
@file{dired+.el}) creates one for the current Dired buffer.

@section Info, @command{man}, EWW, Gnus

@itemize
@item @strong{Info.}  @code{bmkx-info-jump} (@kbd{C-x j i}, or @kbd{j}
in Info mode).  Mode @code{bmkx-info-auto-bookmark-mode} automatically
creates or updates an Info bookmark every time you visit a node.
@item @strong{@command{man} / @command{woman}.}  @code{bmkx-man-jump}
(@kbd{C-x j m}).
@item @strong{EWW.}  @code{bmkx-eww-jump} (@kbd{C-x j e}).  EWW can be
configured so that visiting a page records a bookmark, via
@code{bmkx-eww-replace-keys-flag} which rebinds the built-in EWW
bookmark keys to Bookmark-X's.
@item @strong{Gnus.}  @code{bmkx-gnus-jump} bookmarks a Gnus article
(group, article, message-id).
@item @strong{Legacy W3M.}  @code{bmkx-w3m-jump} still recognises legacy
W3M bookmarks saved by earlier versions of Bookmark-X, but opens them in
EWW.  This fork does not create new W3M bookmarks.
@end itemize

@section Image Bookmarks
@cindex image bookmarks

When you bookmark an image-file target, Emacs's image handler is used
automatically.  @code{bmkx-image-jump} (@kbd{C-x j M-i}) jumps to one;
the description (@kbd{C-h @key{RET}}) shows the full EXIF metadata
(requires @command{exiftool}).

@section URL Bookmarks

@code{bmkx-url-target-set} (@kbd{C-x x c u}) and @code{bmkx-url-jump}
(@kbd{C-x j u}).  The handler is typically @code{browse-url}.

@section Desktop Bookmarks
@cindex desktop bookmarks

@code{bmkx-set-desktop-bookmark} (@kbd{C-x x K}) captures a desktop
(from @file{desktop.el}).  Jumping restores the saved desktop.

Options:
@itemize
@item @code{bmkx-desktop-no-save-vars}---variables to exclude.
@item @code{bmkx-desktop-jump-save-before-flag}---save current desktop
before jumping if it was reached by jumping.
@item @code{bmkx-desktop-save-as-last}---add to @code{kill-emacs-hook}
to remember the last jumped-to desktop.
@end itemize

@section Sequence (Composite) Bookmarks
@cindex sequence bookmarks
@cindex composite bookmarks

A @dfn{sequence bookmark} invokes each member bookmark in turn.
@code{bmkx-set-sequence-bookmark} (@kbd{C-x x c s}) prompts for a
sequence name and the member bookmark names.
@code{bmkx-bmenu-make-sequence-from-marked} turns the marked bookmarks
into a sequence in their current order.  Members may themselves be
sequence bookmarks.

@section Function and Keyboard-Macro Bookmarks

@code{bmkx-make-function-bookmark} (@kbd{C-x x c F}) records a function
symbol or a lambda expression.  With a prefix argument it captures
@code{last-kbd-macro}---a persistent way to replay a keyboard macro.
@code{bmkx-wrap-bookmark-with-last-kbd-macro} (@kbd{C-x x c C-k})
builds a sequence bookmark that first invokes another bookmark and
then plays the macro.

@section Variable-List Bookmarks

@code{bmkx-set-variable-list-bookmark} records a set of variables and
their current values.  @code{bmkx-jump-variable-list} (@kbd{C-x j v})
restores them in the bookmark's buffer.

@section Snippet Bookmarks
@cindex snippet bookmarks

@code{bmkx-set-snippet-bookmark} (@kbd{C-x x M-w}) saves the active
region's text under a bookmark name.  At any time, in any Emacs
session, @code{bmkx-snippet-to-kill-ring} (@kbd{C-x j M-w}) yanks the
saved snippet to the kill ring.

@section Bookmark-List Bookmarks
@cindex bookmark-list bookmarks

A @dfn{bookmark-list bookmark} records the state of @file{*Bmkx List*}
(sort order, filter, regexp pattern, title, omit list).  Jumping to it
restores that state.  Defined as either a real bookmark or as a
command via @kbd{C-c C-c} (@code{bmkx-bmenu-define-command}).

@section Bookmark-File Bookmarks
@cindex bookmark-file bookmarks

Created by @code{bmkx-set-bookmark-file-bookmark} (@kbd{C-x x c y}).
``Jumping'' to one @emph{loads} the referenced bookmark file.  With
@kbd{C-u}, jumping @emph{switches} to it.

@section Defining Your Own Types

Define a handler function and set @code{bookmark-make-record-function}
(or pass a handler via your own bookmark setter).  To register a new
type so @code{bmkx-jump-to-type} recognizes it, provide a function
@code{bmkx-TYPE-alist-only} and call
@code{(bmkx-define-history-variables)}.  The macro
@code{bmkx-define-type-from-handler} (in @file{bookmark-x-mac.el}) does
all of this and also generates a predicate @code{bmkx-TYPE-bookmark-p}
and a ``show only'' command @code{bmkx-bmenu-show-only-TYPE-bookmarks}.


@node Tags
@chapter Tags
@cindex tags

A bookmark @dfn{tag} is a string (or a string plus a Lisp value)
attached to a bookmark.  Tags are persistent.  Multiple bookmarks can
share the same tag; one bookmark can have many.  Tags define @emph{sets}
of bookmarks (@samp{blue}, @samp{vacation/2024/photos}, @samp{todo},
@dots{}) and most Bookmark-X commands can operate on those sets.

@section Adding and Removing Tags

@multitable @columnfractions .42 .22 .14 .22
@headitem Command @tab Global key @tab Bmenu key @tab Action
@item @code{bmkx-add-tags} / @code{bmkx-bmenu-add-tags}       @tab @kbd{C-x x t + b} @tab @kbd{T +} @tab Add tags.
@item @code{bmkx-remove-tags} / @code{bmkx-bmenu-remove-tags} @tab @kbd{C-x x t - b} @tab @kbd{T -} @tab Remove tags.
@item @code{bmkx-remove-all-tags} / @code{bmkx-bmenu-remove-all-tags} @tab @kbd{C-x x t 0} @tab @kbd{T 0} @tab Remove all tags.
@item @code{bmkx-autofile-add-tags}     @tab @kbd{C-x x t + a} @tab (none)   @tab Tag a file (creates autofile).
@item @code{bmkx-untag-a-file}          @tab @kbd{C-x x t - a} @tab (none)   @tab Untag a file.
@item @code{bmkx-copy-tags}             @tab @kbd{C-x x t c}   @tab @kbd{T c} @tab Copy tags to a kill-ring-style slot.
@item @code{bmkx-paste-add-tags}        @tab @kbd{C-x x t p}   @tab @kbd{T p} @tab Paste (additive).
@item @code{bmkx-paste-replace-tags}    @tab @kbd{C-x x t q}   @tab @kbd{T q} @tab Paste (replace).
@item @code{bmkx-rename-tag}            @tab @kbd{C-x x t r}   @tab @kbd{T r} @tab Rename a tag everywhere.
@item @code{bmkx-edit-tags}             @tab @kbd{C-x x t e}   @tab @kbd{T e} @tab Edit a bookmark's tags.
@item @code{bmkx-list-all-tags}         @tab @kbd{C-x x t l}   @tab @kbd{T l} @tab List every defined tag.
@item @code{bmkx-set-tag-value}         @tab @kbd{C-x x t v}   @tab @kbd{T v} @tab Give a tag a value.
@end multitable

The tag prompt uses @code{completing-read-multiple}: enter tags in a
single, comma-separated reply (@samp{work,urgent,backend}).  Each
segment between commas has its own completion against the candidate
list.  Press @key{RET} on an empty input to accept the empty set
(many commands treat that as ``any tag at all'').  Use @kbd{C-q C-j}
to include a newline in a tag.

Inside @file{*Bmkx List*}, @kbd{T +}, @kbd{T -}, @kbd{T 0}, @kbd{T v}
and the Casual tags menu act on the bookmark on the current line --
no separate bookmark prompt.  Outside the list, the @code{bmkx-*}
variants prompt for the bookmark first.

@section Marking by Tag in @file{*Bmkx List*}

The tag-based mark and unmark commands live under @kbd{T m} / @kbd{T u}:

@multitable @columnfractions .47 .15 .38
@headitem Command @tab Key @tab Marks/unmarks bookmarks tagged...
@item @code{bmkx-bmenu-mark-bookmarks-tagged-all}     @tab @kbd{T m *}   @tab with all of the given tags.
@item @code{bmkx-bmenu-mark-bookmarks-tagged-some}    @tab @kbd{T m +}   @tab with some of them.
@item @code{bmkx-bmenu-mark-bookmarks-tagged-not-all} @tab @kbd{T m ~ *} @tab not with all of them.
@item @code{bmkx-bmenu-mark-bookmarks-tagged-none}    @tab @kbd{T m ~ +} @tab with none of them.
@item @code{bmkx-bmenu-mark-bookmarks-tagged-regexp}  @tab @kbd{T m %}   @tab with a tag matching a regexp.
@item @code{bmkx-bmenu-show-only-tagged-bookmarks}    @tab @kbd{T S}     @tab show only tagged.
@item @code{bmkx-bmenu-show-only-untagged-bookmarks}  @tab @kbd{T U}     @tab show only untagged.
@end multitable

A prefix argument flips ``some'' / ``not all'' and ``all'' / ``none.''

@section Tag Values
@cindex tag values

Use @code{bmkx-set-tag-value} (@kbd{T v} in @file{*Bmkx List*}) to give
a tag any readable Lisp value: number, string, list, etc.  A tag with
a value is internally @code{(NAME . VALUE)}.  Most Bookmark-X commands
ignore values; you can use them from your own Lisp.

A single predefined tag has special behaviour: @code{bmkx-jump}.  If
its value is a function, that function is called just after
@code{bookmark-after-jump-hook} runs for the tagged bookmark.

Tag names prefixed with @code{bmkx-} are reserved.

@section Pseudo-Hierarchical Tags
@cindex hierarchical tags

A simple convention---tag names that look like paths
(@samp{vacation/2024/winter/photos})---gives you a tree-shaped
organization without any special syntax.  Use completion (@key{TAB})
on partial prefixes to descend the ``tree.''


@node Annotations
@chapter Annotations
@cindex annotations

An annotation is free-text metadata attached to a bookmark.

@table @code
@item bmkx-annotate-bookmark
@kbd{C-x x a a}.  Prompts for a bookmark and opens an annotation edit buffer.
@item bookmark-show-annotation
@kbd{C-x x a s}.  Shows an annotation in read-only mode (@kbd{C-x C-q}
toggles to edit mode).
@item bookmark-show-all-annotations
@kbd{C-x x a S}.
@item bmkx-annotate-bookmark-this-file/buffer
@kbd{C-x x a b}.
@item bmkx-annotate-all-bookmarks-this-file/buffer
@kbd{C-x x a B}.
@end table

In the edit buffer:

@itemize
@item @code{bookmark-send-edited-annotation} saves (@kbd{C-c C-c}; or
@kbd{C-c C-M-c} when Org mode owns @kbd{C-c C-c}).
@item @code{bookmark-kill-annotation} (@kbd{C-x C-k}) discards changes.
@item The buffer's major mode is controlled by
@code{bmkx-annotation-modes-inherit-from} (default @code{org-mode}).
@item @code{bookmark-automatically-show-annotations}---if non-nil,
jumping to a bookmark pops up its annotation.
@end itemize

@section External Annotations (``Annotation Forwards'')

Keep the inline annotation short and ``forward'' to a file, URL, or
another bookmark.  Put one of these as the first non-blank line:

@example
bmkx-annot-url: "FILE"      ; opens with find-file-other-window
bmkx-annot-url: "URL"       ; opens with browse-url
bmkx-annot-url: "BOOKMARK"  ; jumps to the named bookmark
@end example

When you @emph{show} the annotation, Bookmark-X follows the forward.
When you @emph{edit} it (@kbd{a e}), you still see the literal text.

@section Annotation Commands in @file{*Bmkx List*}

@multitable @columnfractions .47 .15 .38
@headitem Command @tab Key @tab Meaning
@item @code{bmkx-list-show-annotation}                @tab @kbd{a a}     @tab Show this line's annotation.
@item @code{bmkx-edit-annotation}                     @tab @kbd{a e}     @tab Edit this line's annotation.
@item @code{bmkx-show-all-annotations}                @tab @kbd{a A}     @tab Show all annotations.
@item @code{bmkx-bmenu-edit-annotations-for-marked}   @tab @kbd{a >}     @tab Edit annotations for marked.
@item @code{bmkx-bmenu-show-this-annotation+move-down} @tab @kbd{M-@key{down}} @tab Move + show.
@item @code{bmkx-bmenu-show-this-annotation+move-up}   @tab @kbd{M-@key{up}}   @tab Same, going up.
@end multitable

Annotated bookmarks are flagged with @kbd{a} in the display.


@node Multiple Bookmark Files
@chapter Multiple Bookmark Files
@cindex multiple bookmark files

A bookmark file is a physical file on disk containing complete bookmark
records.  Bookmark-X makes it easy to:

@itemize
@item Switch to a different bookmark file (replacing the current
in-memory set).
@item Accumulate bookmarks by loading additional files.
@item Save the current bookmarks to a different file with
@code{bookmark-write} (@kbd{C-x x w}).
@item Create an empty bookmark file with @code{bmkx-empty-file}
(@kbd{C-x x 0}).
@end itemize

@section Switching

@multitable @columnfractions .47 .18 .35
@headitem Command @tab Key @tab Meaning
@item @code{bmkx-switch-bookmark-file-create}  @tab @kbd{C-x x L} or @kbd{L} @tab Switch to another bookmark file.
@item @code{bmkx-load} (no prefix)             @tab @kbd{C-x x l} or @kbd{l} @tab Add bookmarks from a file.
@item @code{bmkx-load} (with prefix)           @tab @kbd{C-u C-x x l} @tab Equivalent to @kbd{L} (switch).
@item @code{bmkx-switch-to-bookmark-file-this-file/buffer} @tab @kbd{C-x x C-l} @tab Switch to a file with only this buffer's bookmarks.
@item @code{bmkx-bmenu-load-marked-bookmark-file-bookmarks} @tab @kbd{M-l} @tab Load every marked bookmark-file bookmark.
@end multitable

@section Copying / Moving / Creating

@multitable @columnfractions .47 .15 .38
@headitem Command @tab Key @tab Meaning
@item @code{bmkx-bmenu-copy-marked-to-bookmark-file}     @tab @kbd{Y > +} @tab Copy marked to another bookmark file.
@item @code{bmkx-bmenu-move-marked-to-bookmark-file}     @tab @kbd{Y > -} @tab Move them.
@item @code{bmkx-bmenu-create-bookmark-file-from-marked} @tab @kbd{Y > 0} @tab New file from marked.
@end multitable

@section Bookmark-File Bookmarks
@cindex bookmark-file bookmarks

Created with @code{bmkx-set-bookmark-file-bookmark} (@kbd{C-x x c y}).
``Jumping'' to one @emph{loads} that bookmark file; with @kbd{C-u} it
@emph{switches} to it.

@section Default for the Next Session
@vindex bmkx-last-as-first-bookmark-file

The default bookmark file for the next Emacs session is the one in use
when you quit, controlled by @code{bmkx-last-as-first-bookmark-file}.
Set this to @code{nil} to always start from @code{bookmark-default-file}.

Bookmark files are @emph{physical}, not logical, groupings.  Copying a
bookmark from one to another duplicates it; the two copies are
independent thereafter.


@node Highlighting
@chapter Highlighting Bookmark Locations
@cindex highlighting bookmarks

Optional---requires @file{bookmark-x-lit.el} on your @code{load-path}.
Bookmark-X can draw a persistent @dfn{highlight} at the position (or
region, or line, or fringe) of a bookmark in its buffer.

@section Styles

@multitable @columnfractions .30 .70
@headitem Style @tab Effect
@item @code{region}                 @tab Highlight the recorded region.
@item @code{line}                   @tab Highlight the bookmark's line.
@item @code{point}                  @tab Highlight the character at the bookmark position.
@item @code{line-beginning}         @tab Highlight the first character on the line.
@item @code{lfringe}                @tab Bitmap in the left fringe.
@item @code{line+lfringe}           @tab Both.
@item @code{rfringe}                @tab Bitmap in the right fringe.
@item @code{line+rfringe}           @tab Both.
@end multitable

Default style per kind (option):

@multitable @columnfractions .50 .50
@item @code{bmkx-light-style-autonamed}             @tab @code{line+lfringe}
@item @code{bmkx-light-style-non-autonamed}         @tab @code{line+rfringe}
@item @code{bmkx-light-style-autonamed-region}      @tab @code{region}
@item @code{bmkx-light-style-non-autonamed-region}  @tab @code{region}
@end multitable

@section Per-Bookmark Overrides (in @file{*Bmkx List*})

@multitable @columnfractions .47 .15 .38
@headitem Command @tab Key @tab Meaning
@item @code{bmkx-bmenu-set-lighting}              @tab @kbd{H +}   @tab Set highlighting for this bookmark.
@item @code{bmkx-bmenu-set-lighting-for-marked}   @tab @kbd{H > +} @tab For all marked.
@item @code{bmkx-bmenu-light}                     @tab @kbd{H H}   @tab Highlight this bookmark.
@item @code{bmkx-bmenu-light-marked}              @tab @kbd{H > H} @tab All marked.
@item @code{bmkx-bmenu-unlight}                   @tab @kbd{H U}   @tab Unhighlight this bookmark.
@item @code{bmkx-bmenu-unlight-marked}            @tab @kbd{H > U} @tab All marked.
@item @code{bmkx-bmenu-mark-lighted-bookmarks}    @tab @kbd{H M}   @tab Mark highlighted bookmarks.
@item @code{bmkx-bmenu-show-only-lighted-bookmarks} @tab @kbd{H S} @tab Show only highlighted.
@end multitable

Each setter command prompts for a style and face, and for a
@emph{condition}---an Emacs-Lisp sexp evaluated whenever the bookmark
is about to be highlighted.  Returning @code{:no-light} suppresses the
highlight.  The sexp may refer to free variables @code{this-bookmark}
and @code{this-bookmark-name}.

@section Automatic Highlighting

@itemize
@item @code{bmkx-auto-light-when-set}---highlight automatically when a
bookmark is created.
@item @code{bmkx-auto-light-when-jump}---highlight automatically when
you jump.
@end itemize

Both options accept the values: @code{autonamed-bookmark},
@code{non-autonamed-bookmark}, @code{any-bookmark},
@code{autonamed-in-buffer}, @code{non-autonamed-in-buffer},
@code{all-in-buffer}, @code{nil} (off).

@section Pulse Highlight on Jump
@vindex bmkx-highlight-on-jump-flag

If @code{bmkx-highlight-on-jump-flag} is non-nil (the default), jumping
to a bookmark that has no region briefly pulse-highlights the landing
line via the built-in @file{pulse.el}.


@node Live Preview
@chapter Live Preview
@cindex preview
@cindex live preview

Live preview shows the bookmark's destination without committing to a
jump.  Two surfaces are provided.

@section In @file{*Bmkx List*}: @code{bmkx-list-preview-mode}
@cindex preview mode
@findex bmkx-list-preview-mode

A buffer-local minor mode in @file{*Bmkx List*}, modeled on the
built-in @code{next-error-follow-minor-mode}.  Toggle with @kbd{M-p}.

When the mode is enabled:

@itemize
@item Moving point onto a bookmark line opens its destination in
another window, without changing the selected window.
@item The mode-line lighter is @samp{ Pv}.
@item The window configuration is captured on mode-entry and restored
on mode-exit.
@end itemize

@vindex bmkx-list-preview-display-action
The display action used to show the destination is governed by
@code{bmkx-list-preview-display-action} (default: some other window,
@code{inhibit-same-window}).

@section On Demand: @kbd{C-o} and @key{TAB}
@findex bmkx-list-switch-other-window

In @file{*Bmkx List*}, @kbd{C-o} and @key{TAB} both invoke
@code{bmkx-list-switch-other-window}: open the bookmark in another
window, leaving the cursor in the list buffer.  Useful for one-off
peeking without entering the full preview mode.

@section In the Minibuffer: consult Integration
@cindex consult integration
@vindex bmkx-preview-use-consult-flag

When the @code{consult} package is loaded and
@code{bmkx-preview-use-consult-flag} is non-nil (the default), the
interactive bookmark-name read for @code{bmkx-jump} (and its
other-window and other-frame variants) is routed through
@code{consult--read} with @code{consult--bookmark-preview} as the
@code{:state} callback---the same mechanism @code{consult-bookmark}
uses.  You get live preview as you move through completion candidates.

If @code{consult} is not loaded, the read falls back to plain
@code{bmkx-completing-read}---no behavior change.


@node Casual Integration
@chapter Casual Integration
@cindex Casual
@cindex Transient menu

The optional file @file{casual-bmkx.el} provides a discoverable
Transient-based menu UI for @file{*Bmkx List*}, in the style of the
@uref{https://github.com/kickingvegas/casual, Casual suite}.

@section Activation

Requires the @code{casual-lib} package (from MELPA, part of the Casual
suite).  When @code{casual-lib} is installed, @file{casual-bmkx.el} is
loaded automatically and binds:

@table @kbd
@item c
@code{casual-bmkx-tmenu}---in @code{bmkx-list-mode-map}.  Opens the
Casual menu.
@end table

(Casual's own ecosystem uses @kbd{C-o} as the entry-point key, but in
@code{bmkx-list-mode} that is already taken by
@code{bmkx-list-switch-other-window}.  @kbd{c} was free.)

If @code{casual-lib} is not installed, Bookmark-X runs unchanged and
@kbd{c} is unbound.

@section Menu Layout

The main menu groups commands by intent: Move, Mark, Delete, Filter and
Show, Edit, Files, Preview, Sort (own submenu), Help, Quit.  See the
in-Emacs help (@kbd{?} in the transient) for the live list.


@node Cycling
@chapter Cycling: the Navigation List
@cindex cycling
@cindex navigation list
@cindex navlist

Bookmark-X lets you @emph{cycle} through a set of bookmarks---like
``favorites'' buttons on a TV remote.  The set being cycled is the
@dfn{navigation list} (navlist).

@section Defining the Navlist

@table @code
@item bmkx-choose-navlist-of-type
@kbd{C-x x :}---all bookmarks of a given type.
@item bmkx-choose-navlist-from-bookmark-list
@kbd{C-x x B}---bookmarks corresponding to a bookmark-list bookmark, or
the current @file{*Bmkx List*} state.
@end table

If you do not define one, the first cycling key takes a snapshot of
the current bookmarks (or of bookmarks for the current file/buffer, for
the file/buffer-specific cycling keys).

@section Cycling Commands

@multitable @columnfractions .42 .28 .28
@headitem Command @tab Forward key @tab Backward key
@item @code{bmkx-next-bookmark-repeat}                     @tab @kbd{C-x x f} / @kbd{C-x x C-f} / @kbd{C-x x @key{right}} @tab @kbd{C-x x b} / @kbd{C-x x C-b} / @kbd{C-x x @key{left}}
@item @code{bmkx-next-bookmark-this-file/buffer-repeat}    @tab @kbd{C-x x n} / @kbd{C-x x C-n} / @kbd{C-x x @key{down}}  @tab @kbd{C-x x p} / @kbd{C-x x C-p} / @kbd{C-x x @key{up}}
@item @code{bmkx-next-lighted-this-buffer-repeat}          @tab @kbd{C-x x C-@key{down}} @tab @kbd{C-x x C-@key{up}}
@end multitable

After @kbd{C-x x} you can also rotate the mouse wheel to cycle.

Show @file{*Bmkx List*} filtered to the navigation list with
@code{bmkx-navlist-bmenu-list} (@kbd{C-x x N}).


@node Automatic Bookmarking
@chapter Automatic Bookmarking
@cindex automatic bookmarking

@section On a Hook

Add @code{bmkx-set-automatic-bookmark} to any hook to create a bookmark
whenever that hook runs:

@lisp
(add-hook 'imenu-after-jump-hook #'bmkx-set-automatic-bookmark)
@end lisp

The bookmark created is an autonamed bookmark.

@section Idle-Period Bookmarking
@findex bmkx-automatic-bookmark-mode

@code{bmkx-automatic-bookmark-mode} is a buffer-local minor mode that
sets an autonamed bookmark whenever Emacs has been idle for
@code{bmkx-automatic-bookmark-mode-delay} seconds in the current
buffer.  @code{bmkx-global-automatic-bookmark-mode} turns it on
everywhere (a bookmark is still only created for the currently selected
buffer).

Tuning options:

@itemize
@item @code{bmkx-automatic-bookmark-mode-lighter}---mode-line lighter
(default @samp{Auto-Bmk}; set to @code{""} to hide).
@item @code{bmkx-automatic-bookmark-min-distance}---minimum distance
(in characters) from the nearest existing automatic bookmark.
@item @code{bmkx-automatic-bookmark-set-function}---which command to
use.
@end itemize

@section Automatic Info Bookmarking
@findex bmkx-info-auto-bookmark-mode

Enable @code{bmkx-info-auto-bookmark-mode} and every Info node you
visit either creates or updates a bookmark named @samp{(MANUAL) NODE}.
@code{bmkx-info-auto-type} chooses between @code{update-only} (default)
and @code{create-or-replace}; @code{bmkx-toggle-info-auto-type} flips
it.

The result is a persistent log of ``what I have read recently in the
Elisp / Emacs / @dots{} manuals.''


@node Autonamed Bookmarks
@chapter Autonamed Bookmarks
@cindex autonamed bookmarks

An @dfn{autonamed} bookmark is a regular, persistent bookmark whose
name is generated automatically from a buffer name plus position
(default format: @samp{000058356 foo.el}---nine-digit position then
buffer name).  It records no region, only a position.

@table @code
@item bmkx-toggle-autonamed-bookmark-set/delete
@kbd{C-x x @key{RET}}.  Toggles the autonamed bookmark at point.
Setting one is one keystroke; deleting it is the same keystroke.  With
a prefix argument it deletes @emph{all} autonamed bookmarks in the
current buffer (after confirmation).
@item bmkx-delete-bookmarks
@kbd{C-x x @key{delete}}.  Deletes individual bookmarks under cursor or
all bookmarks in the buffer (any type).
@end table

Other autonamed commands (not bound by default):
@code{bmkx-set-autonamed-bookmark-at-line},
@code{bmkx-set-autonamed-regexp-buffer},
@code{bmkx-set-autonamed-regexp-region},
@code{bmkx-occur-create-autonamed-bookmarks}.

If you do not want autonamed bookmarks to persist across sessions:

@lisp
(add-hook 'kill-buffer-hook 'bmkx-delete-autonamed-this-buffer-no-confirm)
(add-hook 'kill-emacs-hook  'bmkx-delete-autonamed-no-confirm)
@end lisp

Alternative: make autonamed bookmarks @emph{temporary} via
@code{bmkx-autotemp-bookmark-predicates} (the default), and they will
not be saved.  @xref{Temporary Bookmarks}.

Customize the name format with @code{bmkx-autoname-format} and
@code{bmkx-autoname-bookmark-function}.  The special spec @samp{%B}
refers to the buffer name within the format.


@node Temporary Bookmarks
@chapter Temporary Bookmarks
@cindex temporary bookmarks

A @dfn{temporary} bookmark is one that will not be written to the
bookmark file.  It exists only for the current session.

@section Temporary-Bookmarking Mode
@findex bmkx-temporary-bookmarking-mode

@code{bmkx-temporary-bookmarking-mode} (@kbd{M-L} in @file{*Bmkx List*})
turns on a minor mode that:

@enumerate
@item Switches to an empty bookmark file.
@item Turns off auto-saving (@code{bookmark-save-flag}).
@end enumerate

Every bookmark you create in this mode is therefore session-local.
The mode-line indicator changes to @samp{TEMPORARY Bookmarking}.

@section Per-Bookmark Temporary Flag

@multitable @columnfractions .47 .18 .35
@headitem Command @tab Key @tab Meaning
@item @code{bmkx-toggle-temporary-bookmark}                @tab @kbd{C-M-X} @tab Toggle for this line's bookmark.
@item @code{bmkx-bmenu-toggle-marked-temporary/savable}    @tab @kbd{M-X}   @tab Toggle for the marked bookmarks.
@item Temporary mark/show commands                          @tab @kbd{X M} / @kbd{X S} @tab Mark / show only temporary.
@item @code{bmkx-toggle-autotemp-on-set}                   @tab @kbd{C-x x x} @tab Toggle: make every new bookmark temporary.
@end multitable

@section Autotemp Predicates
@vindex bmkx-autotemp-bookmark-predicates

@code{bmkx-autotemp-bookmark-predicates} is a list of predicates---
typically type predicates such as @code{bmkx-autonamed-bookmark-p}---
that decide which bookmarks become temporary automatically when created
or updated.  The default makes autonamed bookmarks temporary.

@code{bmkx-delete-all-temporary-bookmarks} removes them all from the
current list at once.

Temporary bookmarks are flagged with @kbd{X} in @file{*Bmkx List*}.


@node Bookmark Records
@chapter Bookmark Records
@cindex bookmark record format
@cindex bookmark-alist

A bookmark is a list whose @code{car} is its name (a string) and whose
@code{cdr} is a @dfn{property alist}.  A typical record:

@example
("README"
 (id          . "8f3a7b3c-4dd5-...")
 (filename    . "/home/me/proj/README")
 (front-context-string . "## Introduction")
 (rear-context-string  . "")
 (position    . 1234)
 (last-modified 26013 12345 0 0)
 (visits      . 7)
 (tags ("doc") ("project" . "myproj")))
@end example

@cindex @code{id} property

Every record carries an @code{(id . STRING)} property.  The id is
opaque (@code{format-time-string} plus random hex bits), assigned at
record creation by @code{bookmark-make-record-default}.  Records read
from a file that lack an @code{id} (created by the built-in or by older
Bookmark-X versions) get one generated at load time and the alist is
marked dirty so the next save writes them.

@xref{Migration}, for why the @code{id} field exists and how it relates
to bookmark identity.

@section Lookup Helpers

@table @code
@item bmkx-get-bookmark
@code{(assoc NAME bookmark-alist)}.  Names are unique.
@item bmkx-get-by-id
Find a record by id.  Useful when a bookmark name may have changed.
@end table

@section Name Uniqueness
@cindex name uniqueness

Bookmark names are enforced unique within @code{bookmark-alist}.  Two
mechanisms maintain this:

@itemize
@item @strong{Auto-disambiguation on creation.}  When
@code{bookmark-store} is asked to create a new bookmark whose name
collides with an existing one, the new bookmark is auto-renamed
@samp{foo} @result{} @samp{foo<2>} @result{} @samp{foo<3>} @result{} @dots{}
@item @strong{Deduplication on load.}
@code{bmkx-deduplicate-bookmark-names} runs on
@code{bmkx-read-bookmark-file-hook} and renames any duplicate names
found in a loaded bookmark file.
@end itemize

@section Reading and Writing Bookmark Files
@cindex bookmark file, format

Bookmark files written by this fork are plain printable Lisp.  No
@code{print-circle} markers, no shared structure: just the bookmark
alist as a single readable form.

The format is identical to what built-in @file{bookmark.el} writes,
with one extra alist entry per record:

@example
(id . "20260601T144831-3f5a7c")
@end example

The built-in ignores this entry on read and preserves it on write.

@anchor{Round Trip Caveat}
@subsection Caveat: the Built-in Strips Metadata on Re-Set
@cindex round-trip
@cindex metadata loss
@cindex interop warning

The interop is safe @emph{as long as the built-in does not modify
the record}.  When the built-in only loads a file, displays it, and
saves it back, every alist entry that built-in @file{bookmark.el}
does not recognise is preserved verbatim --- including the
@code{id}, tags, annotation, visit count, last-access time, lighting
override, and any other Bookmark-X property.

However, the built-in's @code{bookmark-set} (and the commands that
call it, including @kbd{C-x r m}) does not @emph{update} an existing
record: it @emph{rebuilds} it from scratch using
@code{bookmark-make-record-default}.  Built-in
@code{bookmark-make-record-default} only knows about the standard
@file{bookmark.el} properties.  The result: if you have a bookmark
named @samp{notes} carrying Bookmark-X metadata (tags,
@code{annotation}, @code{id}, etc.) and you re-set it from a vanilla
Emacs session via @kbd{C-x r m notes RET}, the new record overwrites
the old, and all of those properties are gone.  When the file is
saved next, the metadata is lost on disk too.

To avoid this:

@itemize
@item
If you have to edit a Bookmark-X file from a vanilla Emacs session,
treat it as read-only --- jump to bookmarks, but do not @kbd{C-x r m}
to update one in place.
@item
If you regularly use both vanilla Emacs and Bookmark-X on the same
machine, keep them on @emph{different} bookmark files.
@xref{Multiple Bookmark Files}, for how to switch.
@item
If you accidentally re-set a bookmark from a vanilla session, you
can recover from a backup written by Bookmark-X (set
@code{bookmark-version-control} to @code{t}; backups are kept next
to the bookmark file as @samp{~/.emacs.bmk.~1~} etc.).
@end itemize

@xref{Migration}, for the rationale behind the @code{id} field and
the file-format simplification.


@node Customization
@chapter Customization
@cindex customization

Run @kbd{M-x customize-group RET bookmark-plus RET} for the full
customize interface.  This section enumerates the most commonly tweaked
options.  Many more are listed in @code{customize-group}.

@section Bookmark Naming and Properties

@vtable @code
@item bmkx-new-bookmark-default-names
List of functions consulted to generate the default name for a new
bookmark.
@item bmkx-properties-to-keep
Properties preserved when you overwrite a bookmark.  Default:
@code{(tags annotation)}.
@item bmkx-count-multi-mods-as-one-flag
If non-nil (default), count all the modifications a single command
makes as one for @code{bookmark-save-flag} purposes.
@item bmkx-save-new-location-flag
If non-nil, update the recorded position to the actual destination
after a relocated jump.
@end vtable

@section Tags

@vtable @code
@item bmkx-prompt-for-tags-flag
Prompt for tags whenever a bookmark is created or updated.
@item bmkx-tags-for-completion
Which tags are completion candidates: @code{current} (the default), a
list of specific tags, or a list of bookmark files.
@end vtable

@section Annotations

@vtable @code
@item bookmark-automatically-show-annotations
If non-nil, pop up the annotation when jumping.  Value @code{edit}
opens in edit mode; anything else non-nil opens read-only.
@item bmkx-annotation-modes-inherit-from
Major mode for the annotation edit buffer (default @code{org-mode}).
@end vtable

@section Sorting

@vtable @code
@item bmkx-sort-comparer
The active sort order.  (The built-in @code{bookmark-sort-flag} is
ignored.)
@item bmkx-sort-orders-for-cycling-alist
The orders cycled by @kbd{s s}.
@end vtable

@section @file{*Bmkx List*} State

@vtable @code
@item bmkx-bmenu-state-file
Where the display state is saved.  @code{nil} disables the feature.
@item bmkx-bmenu-commands-file
Where defined commands are appended (@kbd{C-c C-c}, @kbd{C-c C-S-c},
@kbd{C-c C-j}).
@end vtable

@section Bookmark Files

@vtable @code
@item bmkx-last-as-first-bookmark-file
Start each Emacs session with the last bookmark file used.  Set to
@code{nil} to always start with @code{bookmark-default-file}.
@item bookmark-save-flag
(Built-in.)  When to auto-save the current bookmark file (@code{nil} =
never, @code{t} = on every change, integer = after that many
modifications).
@item bookmark-version-control
(Built-in.)  Recommended @code{t} so Bookmark-X's save-time backups
accumulate cleanly.
@end vtable

@section Live Preview

@vtable @code
@item bmkx-preview-use-consult-flag
Use @code{consult} for live preview in @code{bmkx-jump} commands.
Default @code{t}.  Takes effect only when @code{consult} is loaded.
@item bmkx-list-preview-display-action
@code{display-buffer} action used by @code{bmkx-list-preview-mode}.
@end vtable

@section Highlighting

@vtable @code
@item bmkx-light-style-autonamed
@itemx bmkx-light-style-non-autonamed
@itemx bmkx-light-style-autonamed-region
@itemx bmkx-light-style-non-autonamed-region
Per-kind default highlighting style.
@item bmkx-light-left-fringe-bitmap
@itemx bmkx-light-right-fringe-bitmap
Bitmaps for fringe styles.
@item bmkx-light-priorities
Overlay z-order.
@item bmkx-light-threshold
Maximum number of bookmarks to highlight in a buffer.
@item bmkx-auto-light-when-set
@itemx bmkx-auto-light-when-jump
Auto-highlighting trigger.
@item bmkx-tooltip-content-function
Function returning the tooltip body for hovered highlighted bookmarks.
@item bmkx-highlight-on-jump-flag
Pulse-highlight the landing line after a jump (uses built-in
@file{pulse.el}).
@end vtable


@node Migration
@chapter Migration from Upstream Bookmark-X
@cindex migration
@cindex differences from upstream

This is a fork of Drew Adams' Bookmark-X, modernized for Emacs 30+.  If
you are coming from the original, here is what changed.

@section Sibling, Not Replacement
@cindex sibling design

Upstream Bookmark-X @emph{replaced} many built-in @file{bookmark.el}
functions in place: @code{bookmark-set}, @code{bookmark-store},
@code{bookmark-get-bookmark}, the bmenu rendering, and more.  The
replacements were richer, but they also tightly coupled Bookmark-X to
every change in the built-in.

This fork is an @strong{additive sibling}.  No built-in function is
redefined.  Every command lives under the @code{bmkx-} prefix.  Both
systems coexist and operate on the same @code{bookmark-alist} and the
same on-disk bookmark file; you can call either at any time.

The architectural change that made this possible is the new
@code{id} field, described next.


@section The @code{id} Field: Identity in This Fork
@cindex @code{id} field
@cindex bookmark identity
@cindex @code{bmkx-full-record} (upstream)

The single most important difference between this fork and upstream
Bookmark-X is how bookmarks are identified internally.  Understanding
this matters if you write Emacs Lisp that manipulates bookmarks; it
matters less for interactive use.

@subsection What Upstream Did

The user-visible effect upstream achieved was simple: @strong{two
bookmarks could have the exact same display name}.  This was useful
for the @dfn{autofile} pattern --- creating bookmarks named after
files (e.g.@: many @samp{README.md} files, one per project), all
sharing the same short name.

Internally, upstream got this by attaching a hidden tag to each
bookmark's name string.  Even though two name strings displayed as
the same text, they carried different hidden tags pointing to
different records, so the code could still tell them apart.  Emacs
calls these hidden tags @dfn{text properties} on strings; the
specific tag was called @code{bmkx-full-record}.

The same hidden-tag trick also bought upstream three pieces of
internal speed and convenience that did not affect what the user
saw, but mattered to the implementation:

@enumerate
@item
Going from a name to its record was a single hidden-tag read
instead of a search through the bookmark list.
@item
Programs holding an old name string still worked after the bookmark
was renamed in the list --- the hidden tag still pointed at the
same record.
@item
Each row in @file{*Bmkx List*} carried its own record in the hidden
tag of the displayed name, so the bmenu code didn't need to look up
the name to find the record.
@end enumerate

The cost was paid in the on-disk file format.  Hidden tags on
shared strings can only be saved if Emacs is told to preserve
shared-structure (@code{print-circle}); the resulting bookmark file
contained markers like @samp{#1=#1#}.  Files written this way could
not be safely read and re-written by Emacs's built-in
@file{bookmark.el}, which does not turn on shared-structure
preservation when it writes.

@subsection What This Fork Does

Every bookmark record carries an opaque @code{(id . STRING)}
property:

@example
("README.md"
 (id . "20260601T144831-3f5a7c")
 (filename . "/home/me/proj/README.md")
 (position . 1234)
 @dots{})
@end example

The id is generated by @code{bookmark-make-record-default} at record
creation time.  It uses @code{format-time-string} plus a few random
hex bits, giving an opaque, sortable, collision-resistant key.
Records read from a file that lack an id (written by built-in
@file{bookmark.el} or older Bookmark-X) have one generated at load
time, and the alist is marked dirty so the next save persists them.

Names are now enforced unique within @code{bookmark-alist} by
auto-disambiguation: if @code{bmkx-store} is asked to create a new
bookmark whose name collides with an existing one, the new bookmark
is renamed @samp{foo} @result{} @samp{foo<2>} @result{}
@samp{foo<3>} @result{} @dots{} before being added.  Files written
by older versions with duplicate names are deduplicated on load by
@code{bmkx-deduplicate-bookmark-names}.

@subsection What Changed in Practice

Compared with upstream:

@multitable @columnfractions .45 .55
@headitem Capability @tab This fork
@item Display-identical duplicate names           @tab Auto-disambiguated as @samp{foo}, @samp{foo<2>}, @dots{}
@item Looking up a record from its name           @tab Search through the list (was a constant-time tag read)
@item Programs holding a name across a rename     @tab Should hold the @code{id} instead (see Practical Guidance)
@item Each @file{*Bmkx List*} row as its own record handle @tab Read the line, then look up the name
@end multitable

The first row is the only user-visible change.  An autofile use case
(many @samp{README.md} in different directories) that previously
showed two identical-looking rows now shows @samp{README.md} and
@samp{README.md<2>}.  The behavior is the same; the visual is
different.

The other three rows are invisible to interactive users.
Programmatic callers may need adjustment --- see Practical Guidance
below.

@subsection What This Fork Gained

@itemize
@item
@strong{Plain printable file format.}  No @code{print-circle}
markers, no shared-structure tricks.  Bookmark files are valid input
to @code{read} under any settings.  About 300--400 lines of property
machinery, file-write gymnastics, and ``maybe-unpropertize''
helpers were deleted from the source.
@item
@strong{Interop with the built-in.}  A file written by this fork is
read by built-in @file{bookmark.el}; a file written by the built-in
is read by this fork (and the @code{bmkx-read-bookmark-file-hook}
backfills any missing @code{id} fields at load time).  Records the
built-in does not modify are written back unchanged.  See @ref{Round
Trip Caveat}, for the one important caveat when the built-in
@emph{modifies} a record.
@item
@strong{The sibling architecture itself.}  Without giving up the
hidden-tag trick, this fork could not stop redefining
@code{bookmark-store}, @code{bookmark-get-bookmark}, and friends.
The id field made the sibling design possible.
@item
@strong{Identity that survives rename.}  The id lives in the
record, so renaming a bookmark in place preserves the id.  Sequence
bookmarks and bookmark-list bookmarks can safely reference their
components by id rather than by name.
@end itemize

@subsection Practical Guidance for Lisp Callers

If you write Emacs Lisp that holds a reference to a bookmark across
edits, renames, file reloads, or sessions: @strong{hold the id, not
the name}.  The name is a display label and may change at any time;
the id is stable.

@example
;; Save:
(let ((id (bookmark-prop-get "my-bookmark" 'id)))
  ;; @dots{} stash id somewhere @dots{}
  )

;; Retrieve later, even if "my-bookmark" was renamed:
(let ((rec (bmkx-get-by-id stored-id)))
  (when rec
    (bmkx-jump (bookmark-name-from-full-record rec))))
@end example

For ad-hoc interactive use the name is fine; the rename window is
small and the consequences of staleness are usually just a
@samp{No such bookmark} error.

@section No Compatibility Aliases
@cindex no compat aliases

Where this fork renamed an upstream symbol (for example, the bmenu
buffer became @file{*Bmkx List*} and many @code{bookmark-bmenu-*}
defuns became @code{bmkx-list-*}), no compatibility alias was kept.
The user-visible Bookmark-X commands are all @code{bmkx-*}; the
built-in @code{bookmark-*} names always refer to the built-in.

If you had user code that called @code{bookmark-bmenu-foo}, point it at
the corresponding @code{bmkx-list-foo} or @code{bmkx-bmenu-foo}.

@section Emacs 30 or Newer Required
@cindex Emacs 30 requirement

Loading the package on Emacs @math{<} 30 signals an error at load time.
Many polyfills for older Emacs (cl-puthash dispatch, find-tag-default
fallbacks, Emacs-21 fringe-style guards, @dots{}) have been deleted.

@section Dropped External Dependencies
@cindex dropped dependencies

Replaced with built-in equivalents:

@multitable @columnfractions .35 .65
@headitem Upstream dep @tab Replacement
@item @file{crosshairs.el}       @tab Built-in @file{pulse.el}.
@item @file{fit-frame.el}        @tab Built-in @code{fit-frame-to-buffer}.
@item @file{narrow-indirect.el}  @tab Built-in @code{clone-indirect-buffer-other-window} + @code{narrow-to-region}.
@item @file{thingatpt+.el}       @tab Inlined as @code{bmkx-symbol-nearest-point} and friends.
@item @file{zones.el} helper calls @tab Inlined as @code{bmkx-read-any-variable}, @code{bmkx-readable-marker} (the izones bookmark type is still gated on @file{zones.el}).
@item @file{linkd.el} (dead since 2007) @tab Built-in @code{outline-minor-mode}.
@item Active @file{emacs-w3m} integration @tab @code{bmkx-jump-w3m} routes to @code{bmkx-jump-eww}; no new W3M bookmarks created.
@item Icicles completion-framework integration @tab Plain @code{completing-read}; layer @code{vertico} / @code{consult} / @code{marginalia} on top.
@end multitable

@file{dired+.el} is still recognised as an optional dependency.

@section File Format
@cindex file format

Bookmark files are now plain printable Lisp---no
@code{print-circle}/@code{#1=#1#} markers, no @code{bmkx-full-record}
text property on names.  Files round-trip through built-in
@file{bookmark.el} losslessly.

@section New Capabilities
@cindex new capabilities

@itemize
@item Live preview in @file{*Bmkx List*} via @code{bmkx-list-preview-mode}
(@xref{Live Preview}).
@item @code{consult} integration for @code{bmkx-jump} (same chapter).
@item Optional Casual-style Transient menu via @file{casual-bmkx.el}
(@xref{Casual Integration}).
@item Stable bookmark identity via the @code{id} record property.
@item Hard Emacs-30 gate, much cleaner source (~600 lines of dead
version-gates and polyfills removed).
@end itemize


@node GNU GPL
@appendix GNU General Public License
@center Version 3, 29 June 2007

This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify it
under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the
Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or (at your
option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along
with this program.  If not, see @uref{https://www.gnu.org/licenses/}.


@node Key Index
@unnumbered Key Index
@printindex ky

@node Command Index
@unnumbered Command Index
@printindex fn

@node Variable Index
@unnumbered Variable Index
@printindex vr

@node Concept Index
@unnumbered Concept Index
@printindex cp

@bye
